Across the U.S.
this weekend, large crowds
of pro-Palestinian protesters
took to city streets
to call for a cease fire.
And on Capitol Hill Friday,
dozens of activists were arrested
after entering the offices
of several senators.
One of those senators
is here with me now,
independent Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
Senator,
thank you so much for joining me
this morning.
Four weeks ago, more than 1400 Israelis,
mostly civilians,
were slaughtered in their homes
and at a festival.
You've been critical
of Israel's response recently.
How do you think Israel
should be responding?
Well, this is what you got.
So I think clear to most people
what combusted.
And Hamas
is an awful
terrorist organization
is they slaughtered
1400 people in cold blood.
Israel has a right to defend itself.
But what Israel does not, in my view,
have a right to do is to kill thousands
and thousands
of innocent men, women and children
who had nothing to do with that attack.
So the immediate concern for my mind
is that we have got to stop the bombing.
Now, you had six had over 600,000
people pushed out of their homes.
Where are they going?
You're saying in the United Nations
facilities overcrowded,
the sound of water, the sound of food,
the sound of medicine, not enough fuel.
You've got a humanitarian disaster
that has to be dealt with right now.
So, Senator. The the issue.
I'm sorry, Go ahead.
No, please go. Ahead, Don. Okay. So
what you're saying about
what you're saying
about the lack of food and water
and so forth,
I think that most people in the West,
certainly the U.S.
believes that that is
because Hamas is hoarding it.
And the other question is,
how does Israel it is. Not just.
How does Israel destroy Hamas.
With that?
Hamas is burning it.
They are. It's more than that.
That's what Israeli's policy has been.
Okay. So combination of fact.
Let's get to the other
let's get to the other point
that you made,
which is really the key one,
which is innocent civilians dying.
And they are how should his Israel
destroy Hamas
post attack on these innocent civilians
in Israel
without hurting killing innocent men,
women and children
when a Hamas is hiding behind them
and putting them in danger?
How does that work?
Well, that is exactly the right question
to be asked,
the military experts,
of which I am not one.
But clearly, yes,
they have Israel's right
to defend itself.
Hamas has sworn that's what its goal is.
It's to destroy Israel.
They've got to deal with that.
But there's got to be a better way
than killing thousands of men,
women and children.
So, once again, the immediate concern is
you've got to
have a pause in the bombing.
You've got to take care
of the immediate disaster.
Israel has got to change your charging.
Let me just say this.
The United States
of America provides
$3.8 billion every year to Israel.
We have a right.
Israel can do what they want.
They're an independent country.
But we have a right to say sorry.
You need a new military strategy.
Go after Hamas.
But that means
but do not kill innocent
men, women and children.
You mentioned money.
There is going to be a measure
before you relatively soon for the House
passed 14 more than $14 billion.
And there is going to be
at least
some version of that in the Senate.
Will you support that?
Or were you put conditions on?
Well, we'll do it.
The bill will
see what the bill looks like.
But I think it's terribly important
that as we debate that the Saudis will
you want
this money,
you've got to change
your military strategy.
The other point is we have to give hope
to the Palestinian people.
They are living.
They were living before
October 17,
the disastrous situation in Gaza at 75%.
Youth unemployment, massive poverty.
And right now in Israel,
you're having the Netanyahu government,
an extreme right wing government
with racist.
The board
trying to make it impossible
for a two state solution
in the West Bank.
They're killing settlers there.
So what we need
is the world to come together
to give hope to the Palestinians.
We need a two state solution,
and we need to have
many of the very wealthy
countries in the region,
the United Arab Republic,
Saudi Arabia, Qatar.
They are extraordinarily wealthy.
The United States work for the community
in order to provide some hope
and decency of freedom
to the Palestinian people,
which Hamas will have to do.
I just you're right about that.
They have a lot of money
and they, to this point,
have not been really willing
to use that money in that region
to help their fellow Arabs.
I want to just clarify
one thing, Senator, if I might.
You support a humanitarian pause in Gaza
as some of your fellow progressives say
that there should be
a full on cease fire,
which would require an agreement
on both sides to halt the fighting.
Do you support a cease fire?
And if not, why not?
Well, I don't know how you
can have a cease fire
permanent cease fire
with an organization like Hamas,
which is dedicated to turmoil
and chaos
and destroying the state of Israel.
And I think what the Arab countries
in the region understand
that Hamas has got to go.
So what we need right now,
the immediate task
right now is to end the bombing,
to end
the horrific
humanitarian disaster
that the build go forward
with the entire world for a two tier
two state
solution to the crisis
to give the Palestinian people hope.
Senator Democratic Congresswoman Rashida
Tlaib released a video on Friday.
I want you to watch part of it.
Mr.
President,
the American people are not with you
on this one.
We will remember in 2024
that last screen
said Joe Biden
supported the genocide
of the Palestinian people.
I know you know
the definition of genocide.
It is defined as a crime
committed with intent
to destroy a national,
ethnic, racial or religious group.
Do you think that's
what Israel is doing here?
What's going on right
now is a horror show.
We don't have to quibble about words.
Thousands of men,
women and children are being killed.
It has got to end right now.
And one of the things that concerns
me, Donna,
is there's not been enough
talk about the right wing
Republicans are doing right.
They don't want
any aid to go to the Palestinians.
Somebody should be talking about that.
Somebody should be talking about
how Trump wants
to expel Palestinians from this country.
So it's you know,
you can disagree with Joe Biden,
but on his worst day,
it'll be 100 times better
where Trump and the right wing.
So you think that Rashida Tlaib
should save her ire for for Trump
and the right way
and not for the Democrat.
Rashida is no friend of mine.
Her family comes from Palestine.
I think she has been shaken,
as all of us are about.
What goes on is going on
right there, right now.
Yeah,
we have to address
that humanitarian crisis.
But if anyone thinks
that Trump is going to be better
than Biden on this issue
or any other issue for that matter,
I think they are sorely mistaken.
And I understand that.
I also understand
and I know, you know, that words matter.
And I want to ask about what she said.
Look, look,
we're not words matter,
but what matters more down to Israel
have a horrible humanitarian disaster
that has to be dealt with right now.
You call it whatever you want to call it.
It has to be dealt with.
Women and children
cannot be bombed with £2,000 bombs.
And we need the entire.
When she says from the river to the sea,
when she says from the river to the sea,
which the ADL says is anti-Semitic,
she says it's aspirational,
but the ADL says it is anti-Semitic.
Do you want her to stop
using terms like that
when others and others.
Are going down?
You know what I want to know else
this is what
President Obama just said the other day,
I think quite correctly.
And we all got to deal with this
enormously complex issue
and slogans like the River to the Sea.
If the
if that means the destruction of Israel,
that's not going to work.
People are saying Israel, right.
A wrong way for you all the way.
That's not going to work.
This is a horrendously complex
that you've got a right wing government
in Israel
which is racist
and the people, by the way,
the good news is last poll
I saw,
only 18% of the people of Israel
want Netanyahu to stay in office.
I hope they get rid of him.
I hope they put in a government
which understands
the severity of the crisis
and can help us move toward
a two tier state.
Senator, on the other hand,
in terms of Hamas,
you got a terrorist organization
that cannot be trusted for a minute.
This is, as President Obama said,
a very complex issue.
Senator, real quick and you're
you're really alluding to this in your
in your answers and our discussion here.
You really are in a unique position,
maybe even a difficult one,
because you're a leading
progressive voice in American politics
and you're also Jewish
and you have family
who died in the Holocaust.
How difficult is this for you?
This is like this is
nothing to do with me, Don.
What this is, is
as a nation,
we are living now, in my view,
for a more difficult moment
than we have lived in my lifetime.
You know, people are worried about
they've had the pandemic, worried
about climate change,
worried about the attacks on democracy.
Our health care system is is collapsing.
And we have artificial information
which is going to,
you know, make radical changes
to the economy.
You've got a crime all over this country.
People are worried.
The concern
all that I am begging
people is understand
slogans are not going to do it.
Social media is not going to do it.
We need a serious discussion
of how the hell we got out of this
difficult situation.
Maintain democracy, bring peace
to the world,
and it ain't easy.
But slogans are not going to do it
on any side.
Senator, thank you so much for your time
this morning.
I really appreciate it.
Thank you, Don.